# ButterflyThermalTraits
Automating analysis of butterfly thermal traits from images of museum specimens

## Background
Heterogenous responses to climate change highlight the need to identify the underlying organismal mechanisms. Incorporating the mechanisms into ecological and evolutionary forecasting models is essential to accurately project the biodiversity consequences of climate change. Insects offer an excellent system for investigating mechanisms of climate change responses due to their high sensitivity to environmental conditions, their amenability to lab studies, and extensive historical records. Dramatic recent declines in insect populations (Halsch et al. 2021; Wagner et al. 2021; Harvey et al. 2023), including of butterflies in the Western United States (Forister et al. 2021), highlight their sensitivity to recent environmental change.
Our lab and colleagues have developed a mechanistic modeling framework for butterflies that incorporates microclimate, heat balance, and demographic models (Buckley and Kingsolver 2012) as well as evolution (Kingsolver and Buckley 2015) and plasticity (Kingsolver and Buckley 2017) to project responses to climate change. A single adult phenotype—wing coloration—shapes organismal responses at both acute and chronic timescales. Flight in Pierid butterflies is restricted to a relatively narrow temperature range, which is often above environmental temperatures in montane environments (Kingsolver 1983, 1985). Flight is essential to fitness determining processes, including foraging, mating, and reproduction. Flight time closely indexes reproductive output because Pierids lay eggs singly on host plants (Kingsolver 1983). Pierid wings have pteridine white or yellow backgrounds (reflective of solar radiation) interspersed with regions of dark, melanic scales (absorptive) (Kingsolver and Watt 1983; Kingsolver 1995) (Fig. 1). By adjusting exposure of dark scales to radiation, Pierids can behaviorally adjust body temperatures and thus flight duration (Kingsolver 1985). In response to thermal extremes, dark wings can cause overheating and damage, including sharp declines in egg viability (Kingsolver and Watt 1984). In Pierid species with multiple generations per year, melanism is seasonally plastic, with (for example) darker wings in cool seasons (short photoperiods, cooler developmental temperatures). Such seasonal plasticity enables adults to balance flight capacity against risk of overheating. We seek to innovate machine learning approaches to enable high-throughput phenotyping techniques and applying them to museum specimens.

## Question
How has body size and wing melanism, including plasticity in response to photoperiod and seasonal patterns, shifted over recent decades? 

## Hypothesis
Extended developmental seasons along with increases in summer extreme body temperatures have selected for increased plasticity. Wing melanism and body sizes have decreased overall, and seasonal patterns have shifted earlier in the season. 

## Objective
We aim to supplement historical data and our sampling by developing automated techniques for extracting wing melanism from museum specimens with digital images available via the Symbiota Collections of Arthropods Network (SCAN, https://scan-all-bugs.org/). The collection includes ~41,000 images of cabbage white butterfly (Pieris rapae) and ~690 images of western white butterfly (Pontia occidentalis) specimens. Automation will allow generalizing our linkages of wing traits to thermoregulatory function and ecological and evolutionary responses to climate change across species.
